Journal of Business Research 64 (2011) 150–156

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Business Research





Writing and publishing important scientiﬁc articles: A reviewer's perspective
David J. Ortinau
University of South Florida, College of Business, Department of Marketing, Tampa, FL 33620-5500, USA


a r t i c l e    i  n f o  

Article history:
Received 1 January 2010
Received in revised form 1 January 2010 Accepted 1 February 2010

Keywords:
Scientiﬁc article
Writing and publishing insights Journal quality image
Review process
Important-relevant contributions
a b s t r a c t  

The article discusses various complex and interrelated quality issues mediating reviewers' expectations and standards.  
Authors  must  meet  or  exceed  reviewers'  and  editors'  expectations  of  providing  convincing arguments and 
support of the importance and relevancy of the research topic and questions, evidence of scientiﬁc rigorousness, and 
meaningful and usefulness of the ﬁndings making substantial and/or incremental contributions to the scientiﬁc body of 
marketing knowledge. Marketing scholars struggling to publish their research in high-quality marketing journals will 
deﬁnitely beneﬁt from the insights in this article.
© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction

Throughout the world, university and program accreditation and scholarly  research  standards  are  rapidly  changing  
and  marketing scholars face increasing research and publishing productivity require- ments governing hiring and  
promotion/tenure decisions as  well  as establishing a successful professional career. Pressures are growing for  
marketing  scholars,  particularly  young  assistant  professors,  to provide  evidence  that  their  scholarly  
research  activities  include conducting high-quality theoretical and empirical research projects which are innovative 
and cutting edge (Armstrong, 2003; Ladik and Stewart, 2008; Rust, 2008; Weitz, 1992), leading to the publication of 
important scientiﬁc articles (Armstrong and Pagell, 2003; Woodside, 2009).
Scientiﬁc articles provide meaningful contributions to the body of marketing knowledge on topics interesting and 
relevant to a variety of constituencies  and  readership  groups  such  as  other  academic researchers,  research  
practitioners,  managers,  public  policymakers, marketing educators, society at large (Brown and Dant, 2008; Levy and 
Grewal, 2007). Marketing scholars also face increasing pressures of  publishing  scientiﬁc  contributions  in  the  
marketing  discipline's prestigious  journals  with  high-quality  journal  impact  metrics.  This emphasis on where 
marketing scholars should disseminate important scientiﬁc  contributions  is  not  new  among  faculty  operating  
within research-dominant work environments. Yet, the growing pervasive- ness has renewed long-standing concerns, 
issues, and debates of the sound  logic  and  practicality  of  such  a  limiting  dissemination  focus (Armstrong, 
1982a; Kupfersmind and Wonderly, 1994; Pfeffer, 2007),


E-mail address: dortinau@usf.edu.
especially  from  those  marketing  journals  that,  in  some  minds,  fall short  on  the  prestige  image  criterion. 
 Confounding  this  direct relationship between important scientiﬁc contributions and prestige marketing  journals  is  
empirical  evidence  suggesting  only  a  small percentage (about 3%) of the articles appearing in prestige journals 
contain  meaningful  important  scientiﬁc  contributions  concerning new innovative, important, and/or useful insights 
that enhance the body of marketing knowledge (Armstrong, 1997, 2004; Mort, McColl- Kennedy, Kiel, and Soutar, 2004).
The current article is not about rehashing the issues and debates concerning the perceptions of ranking marketing 
journals, judging a journal's quality image or impact of marketing journals. Instead, the article  discusses  the  
issues,  concerns,  and  elements  relating  to undertaking important and relevant research endeavors and writing 
important  scientiﬁc  articles  that  offer  meaningful  and  useful  con- tributions to the ever-growing marketing 
literature.
Presenting insights (or tips) on writing journal articles is not a new endeavor.  The  existing  literature  provides  
numerous  meaningful  and useful insights on surviving journal review and publishing processes (e.g., Armstrong, 1982a; 
Levy and Grewal, 2007; Ortinau, 2010; Stewart, 2002). Publishing insights appear as elegantly written editorials by 
current and past editors of the discipline's journals (e.g., Brown and Dant, 2008; Ladik and Stewart, 2008; Stewart and 
Zinkhan, 2006; Weitz, 1992; Wittink, 2004). Articles invited by various journals (e.g., Babin, Hair, and Boles, 2008; 
Ortinau, 2010; Shugan, 2003; Summers, 2001), specialty books on the topic (e.g., Arnould, 2003; Kupfersmind and 
Wonderly, 1994), and through  Meet  the  Journal  Editors  sessions  at  national/international marketing education 
conferences.
With the existing insights on writing and publishing marketing journal  articles  and  the  discipline's  rapid  
expansion  of  publishing opportunities in new U.S. and international marketing journals, one

0148-2963/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2010.02.002

D.J. Ortinau / Journal of Business Research 64 (2011) 150–156                                                           
                                                151


intuitive  prediction  is  marketing  scholars'  publishing  success  of important  scientiﬁc  articles  is  rapidly  
becoming  a  more  common occurrence. Yet, this trend prediction is perplexing and contradictive because  the  
prestigious  and  top  25  ranked  marketing-oriented journals consistently report annual acceptance rates ranging 
between
7  and  18%.  The  low  acceptance  rates  suggest  a  disconnect  gap between  conducting  important,  relevant  
quality  research,  and ultimately publishing that research in quality journals.
This  article  investigates  and  discusses  issues  that  underlie  the apparent disconnect gap between researching 
and publishing impor- tant scientiﬁc contributions and provides useful insights to writing scientiﬁc articles. Three 
main objectives guide the focus of the article. The ﬁrst objective is to enhance awareness and understanding that 
publication  success  involves  a  number  of  subjective  assessment processes  relating  to  the  overall  evaluation 
 of  how  well  an  article conveys a high-quality journal image. Another objective is to provide clear and useful 
insights of the key elements editorial reviewers (or peer  reviewers)  look  for  in  judging  evidence  of  high  
quality, importance, relevancy, and contribution value of manuscript submis- sions  for  publication  in  prestigious  
and  high-quality  marketing- oriented journals. The last objective is to validate previous research and  publishing  
insights  of  past  and  current  journal  editors  and academic  scholars.  The  article's  discussions  and  insights 
 integrate several signiﬁcant themes. One theme is the relevancy and impor- tance  of  the  topic  under  investigation 
 as  well  as  the  research questions  that  drive  important  scientiﬁc  research  endeavors  (pro- jects). Another 
theme is the use of double blind review processes for judging the relevancy and importance of the research ﬁndings and 
contributions to the existing body of scientiﬁc marketing knowledge. The  ﬁnal  theme  relates  to  the  importance  of 
 using  solid  theory  or theoretical rationale as the driver of scientiﬁc research endeavors (see support  for  these  
type  of  themes  are  found  in  Armstrong,  1982b; Brown and Dant, 2008; Ladik and Stewart, 2008; Levy and Grewal, 
2007; Stewart and Zinkhan, 2006; Shugan, 2003; Sutton and Staw, 1995). Additionally, this article uses several unique 
perspectives in discussing the relevant issues within each theme. First, the comments and  insights  are  from  an  
editorial  reviewer's  (or  peer  reviewer's) perspective rather than current or past journal editors. Second, this 
article uses a cognitive image framework that incorporates many of the interconnected theoretical underpinnings of 
expectancy theory, expectancy–performance  theory,  and  conﬁrmation–disconﬁrmation theory. The framework suggests that 
the overall perceived judgment of a manuscript providing solid (convincing) evidence of conveying a high  journal  
quality  image  plays  a  critical,  yet  elusive,  role  in mediating journal editors' ﬁnal acceptance decisions.
Organization of the remainder of the article is by categorical issues
relevant  in  writing  important  scientiﬁc  papers  and  the  reviewing processes  of  the  top  25  marketing  
journals.  The  discussion  ﬁrst focuses  on  what  elements  constitute  important  scientiﬁc  research endeavors  and 
 how  particular  environmental  issues,  high-quality rigorous research practices, and different marketing journals' 
person- alities inﬂuence the selection of research topics and endeavors.
The second part focuses on the beneﬁts and limitations of using subjective and objective impact metrics as determinants 
of important scientiﬁc contributions to the body of marketing knowledge. Next is a discussion on  who are  editorial  
reviewers  (or  peer reviewers) and their responsibility in determining scientiﬁc contributions as well as developing  
and  enhancing  the  body  of  marketing  literature.  The following section identiﬁes the critical elements of a 
scientiﬁc journal manuscript  and  discusses  the  types  of  concerns  (or  weaknesses) having negative effect on 
reviewers' perceptions and assessments of manuscripts'  high  journal  quality  image  along  with  insights  on 
avoiding these issues and concerns. Finally, a list of research reference sources offers opportunities for gaining an 
in-depth understanding of what high-quality, value-added journals expect in submitted scien- tiﬁc manuscripts.

2. IThportant scientiﬁc research endeavors

Prior to discussing the elements and issues of writing important scientiﬁc  articles,  authors  need  to  clearly  
understand the  elements that constitute a scientiﬁc research endeavor. With no one agreed- upon set of criteria, some 
researchers believe that a scientiﬁc research endeavor  is  one  that  focuses  on  creating  empirical  evidence  that 
supports grounded marketing principles, which, in turn, creates useful and understandable knowledge about the principle 
under investiga- tion (Armstrong and Pagell, 2003). Armstrong (2003) suggests that useful  knowledge  serves  as  
evidence  that  contributes  to  better decisions than would have otherwise been made in a given situation. One  
problem  issue  with  viewing  a  scientiﬁc  endeavor  simply  as  a research  investigation  that  produces  useful  
knowledge  is  that knowledge is veriﬁable objective facts, whereas the usefulness tag is the outcome of someone's 
subjective judgment and subjectivity is not an  element  of  a  scientiﬁc  process.  Conducting  important  scientiﬁc 
research  endeavors  requires  the  awareness,  understanding  and implementation of the cornerstones (underpinnings) 
of the scientiﬁc method within the methodologies use to collect and analyze empirical data. These cornerstone 
characteristics are logic, reliability, validity, objectivity, theoretical rationale, rigorousness, comprehensible, and 
generalizability  (Hair,  Bush,  and  Ortinau,  2009)  and  serve  as  the fundamental foundation of important 
scientiﬁc inquiries.
Determination of the importance of a scientiﬁc research endeavor
relies on the importance and relevancy of the topic and the speciﬁc research  questions.  Some  researchers  believe  
important  scientiﬁc endeavors lead to conducting empirical research that are innovative and cutting edge (Armstrong, 
2003; Rust, 2008; Weitz, 1992). Other scholars suggest research topics must be viewed as being interesting and relevant 
by various constituencies and readership groups (Brown and Dant, 2008; Levy and Grewal, 2007; Shugan, 2003). A problem 
relating to all the above characteristics is that they are outcomes of subjective  evaluative  judgments.  To  overcome 
 the  subjectivity weakness  in  estimating  the  quality  image  and  scientiﬁc  impact  of journal articles, 
objective metrics are available such as social science citation index, usefulness index (Armstrong, 2004; Mort et al., 
2004), Thomson Reuter's Web of Science — ISI Web of Knowledge (Dant and Brown, 2009), online Google Scholar, and 
multiple types of journal — author  impact  metrics  (Woodside,  2009).  A  fundamental  problem with these objective 
citation and impact metrics is they are post facto measures following an article's acceptance and provide little value 
in the writing and publishing processes.

2.1. Issues that impact selecting a scientiﬁc research topic

Several  environmental  factors  inﬂuence  the  selection  of  a meaningful research topic. Scholars must remind 
themselves that to achieve  the  goal  of  publishing  important  scientiﬁc  journal  articles requires  attention  to  
high-quality  scientiﬁc  (rigorous)  research practices to ensure the opportunity of gathering high-quality data — a 
necessity for writing a manuscript that reviewers and editors deem journal quality. On the other hand, low-quality 
research practices lead to  low-quality  data  and  increase  the  likelihood  that  experienced reviewers will uncover 
enough weaknesses to assess the manuscript submission as lacking the quality necessary for serious consideration of 
journal publication.
Researchers  must  come  to  grip  with  their  professional  career aspirations. A researcher's scholarly identity in 
the minds of his/her peers  is  part  of  a  self-image  continuum  relating  to  the  scholarly reputation  one  wants 
 to  be  known  and  recognized  for  in  the marketing  discipline  (e.g.,  national/international  reputation).  En- 
hancement  of  scholarly  reputation  is  primarily  through  publishing success  in  prestigious  and  high-quality  
journals  and  directly  inﬂu- ences potential topics of scientiﬁc signiﬁcance. The cultural orienta- tion of the work 
environment affects professional career aspirations

152                                                                                                D.J. Ortinau / 
Journal of Business Research 64 (2011) 150–156


and the types of scholarly research endeavors and topics undertaken. An  abundance  of  nonscientiﬁc  anecdotal  
evidence  suggests  that teaching-dominant  and  balanced  teaching/research  work  environ- ments  restrict  the  
development  of  important  scientiﬁc  research programs  compared  to  research-dominant  cultural  environments that 
place heavy emphasis on conducting and publishing important scientiﬁc research ﬁndings in prestigious and high-quality 
journals.

2.2. Marketing journals' personalities

Understanding the different “personalities” of potential targeted journals for manuscript submission is a further issue 
in considering a research  topic.  Marketing  journals  have  unique  differences  in philosophy,  writing  style,  
publishing  guidelines,  and  page/word limitations.  To  assume  all  marketing  journals  equally  embrace  all 
article approaches (e.g., conceptual versus empirical; new innovative versus  extensions;  controversial  versus  
validating  insights;  and theoretical versus application) creates an unnecessary risk factor of undertaking a research 
endeavor with minimal appeal to a prospec- tive journal's editor, possibly resulting in a desk rejection decision. The 
following examples illustrate the importance of understanding the personality differences among marketing journals. 
First, a topic focusing on applying a strong theory in a service marketing setting with  strong  managerial  
implications  will  not  be  a  good  ﬁt  for  the Journal of Consumer Research (JCR) but will be appealing to the 
Journal of Service Research (JSR), Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science (JAMS), or the Journal of Business 
Research (JBR). Likewise, a scientiﬁc research endeavor primarily focusing on method and measurement issues or a new 
modeling technique is appropriate for the Journal of Marketing Research (JMR) or Marketing Science (MS) but less 
attractive to journals such as Industrial Marketing Management (IMM), Journal of Retailing (JR), or Psychology and 
Marketing (P&M).
Scholars wanting to conduct important scientiﬁc research endea- vors  need  to  be  mindful  of  the  following  types  
of  questions  when selecting a meaningful research topic and formulating the research questions:
•  How  important  is  the  proposed  topic  to  the  existing  body  of marketing knowledge?
•  What  is  the  relevancy  of  the  topic  and  research  questions  to different constituencies or readership 
groups?
•  What  scientiﬁc  research methodologies  and measurement proce- dures ensure capturing high-quality data for 
addressing the main research questions?
•  What  are  the  appropriate  target  journals  for  such  a  scientiﬁc research endeavor?
•  What is the meaningful story line from addressing the expressed research questions?
•  Will  the  story  be  empirical  dominant  or  theoretical–conceptual dominant in nature?
•  What  are  the  scientiﬁc  contributions  that  the  research  endeavor makes to the existing literature?

3.  The  role  of  journal  quality  iThage  in  scientiﬁc  research  and publication

Some  marketing  academics  believe  a  direct  relationship  exists between  marketing  journals'  journal  quality  
image  and  publishing important  scientiﬁc  journal  articles  (Campanario,  1996;  Dant  and Brown, 2009; Rust, 2008; 
Soutar, 2007; Stewart 2002; Wittink, 2004). In contrast, other scholars provide empirical evidence suggesting that 
prestigious  and  high-quality  journals'  reviewing  processes  are  less favorable  toward  publishing  scientiﬁc  
articles  that  offer  innovative but controversial ﬁndings (Armstrong, 1997, 2003; Soper et al., 1995). The relevance 
and importance of topics and research questions, type and magnitude of contributions, and theoretical-based research
are three important subjective criteria used in assessing the journal quality  factor  of  the  article  in  the  
review  process.  In  turn,  post publication objective metrics (e.g., citation indices, journal familiarity, journal 
usage rates, acceptance rates, journal impact factor, usefulness information  index,  etc.)  serve  as  appropriate  
indicators  of  the perceived quality of marketing journals. In this article, journal quality image represents 
someone's expression of a journal's overall worth (or value) to the marketing discipline and serves as the critical 
overall standard  that  mediates  the  impact  of  the  subjective  and  objective quality measures on the 
acceptance/rejection judgments of scientiﬁc manuscripts made by editorial reviewers, editors, and ultimately the 
journal's and discipline's readership. Unfortunately, determination of a  scientiﬁc  article's  true  importance  and  
impact  to  the  body  of marketing knowledge  comes  about using any  number  of surrogate citation indices or impact 
metrics in later times following the article's acceptance  for  publication.  Citation  indices,  impact  factors,  
and/or simple reference counting methods have weaknesses ranging from inappropriate samples of journals and survey 
participants, to restric- tions of journal inclusion in citation counts and inabilities to capture true scholarly 
impact of journal articles. (See Dant and Brown (2009) and  Soutar  and  Murphy  (2009)  for  insightful  discussions  
of  the limitations of using subjective and objective metrics to estimate the journal quality and importance of 
scientiﬁc marketing knowledge.)

4. Editorial reviewer role and responsibility

Journal  editors  and  editorial  reviewers  are  key  players  in  the process  of  publishing  important  scientiﬁc  
articles  in  prestige  and high-quality  journals.  Although  editors  and  reviewers  have  similar reviewing  
expertise,  main  differences  exist  that  authors  need  to understand about these players' positions. The ﬁrst 
difference is the contradicting objectives and responsibilities of each position. Journal editors are in the business 
of producing a certain number of high- quality  journal  issues  each  year  and  need  acceptable  articles  to 
achieve  that  important  objective.  In  contrast,  reviewers  view  and accept  their  main  objective  as  ensuring  
articles  meet  the  journal's required quality level and interpret their main responsibility as one of the 
establishing reasons for rejections (Armstrong and Pagell, 2003; Ladik and Stewart, 2008).
The  degree  of  meaningfulness  of  the  article's  contributions  is another difference. Editors primarily look for 
and accept articles that provide relative (incremental) contributions placing main emphasis on the interest and 
importance of the topic (or phenomenon) under investigation. On the other hand, reviewers place stronger emphasis on 
empirical evidence supporting the existence of absolute (substan- tive)  contributions  that  clearly  illustrate  an  
extension  of  current scientiﬁc knowledge or creating new (and sometimes controversial) knowledge or insights on the 
topic under investigation.
Marketing faculty who lack journal-reviewing experience and/or who often receive rejection decisions on journal 
manuscript submis- sions  tend  to  formulate  a  somewhat  negative  perceptual  image  of journal reviewers. In many 
cases, authors judge journal reviewers as being unenlightened people who do not understand the manuscript's story  
line,  resulting  in  an  unfair  assessment  of  the  manuscript's quality  and  the  importance  of  the  
contributions  made  to  the marketing  literature  (Armstrong,  1982c,  1997,  2003).  Scholars struggling  to  
publish  their  research  can  gain  useful  manuscript writing  insights  by  understanding  the  role  of  editorial  
reviewers and their responsibilities in the publishing process.

4.1. Editorial reviewer roles

Reviewers are journal editors' lifeblood in assessing manuscripts' overall  quality  and  potential  value  to  the  
marketing  literature. Reviewer  selection  involves  a  number  of  factors,  some  subjective and other objective in 
nature. Review board members represent well-

D.J. Ortinau / Journal of Business Research 64 (2011) 150–156                                                           
                                                153


established,  acknowledged  scholars  in  their  particular  sub-ﬁeld  of marketing. Reviewers have authoritative 
knowledge and understand- ing of theory, methodology-measurement, data analysis procedures, and topical expertise. With 
prestigious and high-quality journals, the creditability of a reviewer's school afﬁliation has some impact on the 
selection  decision  (Ingene,  2009).  Editorial  reviewers  have  distin- guishing  research/publishing  records  of  
accomplishment,  proven reviewing skills, and afﬁnity for various topical domains that directly ﬁt the journal's 
mission, focus, and philosophy.

4.2. Editorial reviewer responsibilities

Scholarly  researchers  must  accept  the  reality  that  all  journal review  processes  are  inherently  imperfect  
and  somewhat  bias  in nature.  Despite  the  good  intentions  and  heroic  efforts  of  journal editors and 
reviewers to incorporate objective-oriented rating metrics in the process, article reviews consist of sets of 
subjective evaluative judgments  on  how  well  a  manuscript  meets  or  exceeds  predeter- mined editor/reviewer 
expectations. Another reality is the skill levels of all reviewers are not necessarily equal across all reviewing 
criteria (see  Armstrong  (1997)  and  Pfeffer  (2007)  for  in-depth,  insightful discussions  of  empirical  evidence 
 of  the  inherent  biases  of  journal review processes). Journal editors perceive good reliable reviewers as a  
scarce  resource  capable  of  providing  important  and  critical evaluative  insights.  Some  scholars  criticize  
the  editorial  reviewing processes  as  restricting  dissemination  of  useful  information  in journals (Armstrong, 
1997; Pfeffer, 2007). Journal reviewers function as  gatekeepers  in  building  and  extending  the  published  body  
of marketing  knowledge.  Reviewers'  evaluative  insights  signiﬁcantly inﬂuence  what  scientiﬁc  ﬁndings  and  
information  become  valued parts of the literature. The vast majority of journal reviewers take very seriously their 
responsibility of ensuring the importance, relevance, and quality of the contributions published in the literature. To 
ensure a  journal's  quality  image,  reviewers  provide  constructive  criticism through their comments, concerns, and 
questions — often pointing out  obvious  and  nonobvious  manuscript  weaknesses  and  ﬂaws. Whether the editor 
ultimately accepts a manuscript or not, excellent reviewers  provide  authors  with  understandable  and  directional 
insights  for  improving  the  initial  manuscript's  quality  level  and serve as positive enablers for authors having 
a constructive journey through the review process.

5. Insights to writing iThportant scientiﬁc articles

The main intention of this section is not to offer a list of do's and don'ts for writing important scientiﬁc articles 
but rather make authors aware of the issues that can severely limit a manuscript's chances of providing  scientiﬁc  
value  and  surviving  a  journal  review  process. Since no best approach exists for providing useful insights to 
writing a scientiﬁc journal article, organization of the ensuing comments is by generic major section headings common 
in many journal manuscripts (i.e., Introduction, Literature review–conceptualization and hypothe- ses,  Method,  
Results–ﬁndings,  Discussion,  Conclusions/managerial implications, and Limitations/future research opportunities).

5.1. Introduction

Reviewers view this section as critical in setting up the entire story line  and  position  of  the  article.  The  
introduction  section's  content creates  journal  reviewers'  baseline  expectations  for  evaluating  the remainder 
of the article. Reviewers look for clear communication of what  topic  (or  phenomenon)  and  research  questions  are  
to  be investigated.  Authors  must  present  a  convincing  argument  to  the importance  of  undertaking  the  
research  investigation,  integrating supportive  theoretical  evidence  from  the  literature  relating  to  the 
problem (Smith, 2003). Reviewers look for clear concise expressions

of  the  research  questions  (or  problems)  and  the  objective(s),  or purpose,  of  conducting  the  scientiﬁc  
inquiry.  Building  a  solid, convincing  argument  is  what  creates  readership  interest  and relevancy/importance  
of  the  investigation  that  reviewers  require. Another key component of the introduction section is clear expression 
of  the  study's  potential  contributions  to  the  literature.  Reviewers expect clear and concise statements 
representing the substantive (or absolute)  contributions  to  the  body  of  scientiﬁc  knowledge  and empirical   
evidence   supporting   the   meaningfulness   of   each contribution.
Some typical positioning arguments that reviewers deem weak, unfavorable, and very difﬁcult to successfully support 
are:
•  The researcher ﬁnds the topic personally interesting.
•  The  construct  under  investigation  has  not  received  enough attention in the marketing literature.
•  The literature does not cover the construct in a marketing context.
•  Much  is  unknown  about  the  relationships  between  the  speciﬁed constructs.
Journal reviewers evaluate these types of positioning arguments as unacceptable because they come up short in meeting 
or exceeding reviewers' expectations of the importance and relevancy criteria for conducting scientiﬁc research 
endeavors. The following examples are successful positioning approaches in building convincing arguments for the 
relevancy and importance of research endeavors.
Example 1: Gaps in the literature suggest the need to develop an alternative, or competing methodological or 
measurement approach for investigating a particular construct, relationship, or phenomenon. This  positioning  strategy 
 requires  authors  to  clearly  identify  and theoretically support the weaknesses (or problems) of the existing 
methodology or measurement approach. Authors must present clear and convincing discussions explaining why the 
weaknesses must be resolved  as  well  as  the  importance  of  correcting  the  weaknesses. When the construct of 
interest has been previously measured using different  methods,  reviewers  look  for  a  concise  discussion  of  the 
meaning of those differences and their implications.
Example  2:  The  marketing  literature  portrays  the  existence  of empirical controversy regarding the true 
relationship(s) between the constructs  under  investigation.  This  positioning  approach  requires authors to clearly 
identify and empirically support the controversial relationship(s) and provide explanation of why the controversy needs 
to  be  resolved,  including  a  concise  discussion  of  the  competing theoretical rationale underlying the 
differences.
Example 3: Empirical evidence suggests a deﬁnite need to expand a particular current theory or paradigm. Here, authors 
must clearly identify the weaknesses of the existing theory (or paradigm) as well as speciﬁcally explain and illustrate 
how the proposed expansion will improve  that  theory  or  paradigm.  Reviewers  evaluate  how  the expansion will add 
value  to understanding that theory (paradigm) as well as the contributions to the body of marketing knowledge.

5.2. Literature review–hypotheses

Labeling  of  this  section  of  a  scientiﬁc  research  article  can  be  a number of ways depending on the overall 
focus of the research. The function of a literature review section is to provide further detail and clarity to the 
story line of the research endeavor or the convincing argument of the selected positioning approach. Important 
scientiﬁc research investigations can involve the creation of conceptual frame- works or theoretical models that 
illustrate the expected relationships between two or more constructs under investigation. Authors must provide clear 
discussions of the literature-based insights for each of the key constructs as well as any known relationships between 
them. A  critical  element  to  important  scientiﬁc  investigations  is  the generation  of  testable  hypotheses  
that  accurately  identify  the directionality  of  the  relationships  between  constructs.  Researchers

154                                                                                                D.J. Ortinau / 
Journal of Business Research 64 (2011) 150–156


will  formulate  and  test  either  dominant  hypotheses  (DH)  or competing hypotheses (CH). Armstrong, Brodie, and 
Parsons (2001) indicate researchers use dominant hypotheses signiﬁcantly more in scientiﬁc  research  endeavors  than  
competing  hypotheses,  for  the following types of reasons:
•  DH  provides  researchers  with  a  structure  for  collecting  and analyzing speciﬁc data under different 
conditions.
•  DH  builds  cumulative  amounts  of  knowledge  through  existing theoretical rationale and/or summarized empirical 
evidence from previous research endeavors.
•  DH rules out acceptance of null hypothesized relationships.
Dominant hypotheses are not without some drawbacks. DH en- courages researchers to primarily look for and emphasize 
conﬁrming evidence, increasing the possibility of misinterpreting data results in order to conﬁrm the hypothesized 
relationships. Prior expectations of testable  relationships  can  negatively  affect  conclusions  by  forcing 
researchers  to  create  and  report  speculative  outcomes.  Armstrong et  al.  (2001)  conclude  that  dominant  
hypotheses  do  not  promote researcher objectivity but rather increase the probability of creating conﬁrmation bias. 
Generating and testing competing hypotheses lead to  researcher  objectivity,  discovery  of  true  hypothesized  
relation- ships, and focus on providing disconﬁrming empirical evidence. (See Armstrong  et  al. (2001)  for further 
discussions  of the beneﬁts  and limitations  of  using  dominant  and  competing  hypotheses  in  a scientiﬁc research 
investigation.) No matter the type of hypothesis in  scientiﬁc  research  investigations,  reviewers  evaluate  how  
well existing literature insights and theoretical rationale support identify- ing  and  justifying  each  hypothesized  
relationship  and  under  what conditions. Authors need to remember that providing only literature review insights in 
building justiﬁcation of hypothesized relationships is not the same as using known theoretical (or scientiﬁc) 
rationale. Reviewers  look  for  integration  of  solid  theoretical  rationale  being able to explain how 
relationships work and under what conditions, not just what methodological, measurement, and ﬁndings previous 
researchers report.

5.3. Method

The focus of the method section is to discuss fully the speciﬁc data and  collection  procedures  use  for  
investigating  and  validating hypothesized  relationships,  as  well  as  describing  the  tangible elements that 
affect the data collection processes. Reviewers interpret the detailedness of the information in the method section as 
being very important in assessing not only the quality of the data used in testing hypothesized relationships but also 
in judging the strength of the scientiﬁc rigorousness in conducting the investigation. The end goal  of  the  research  
endeavor  (i.e.,  construct  development  and reﬁnement  of  a  new  measurement  approach  or  prediction  of  a 
speciﬁc  behavioral  phenomenon)  partially  determines  the  actual extent  of  scientiﬁc  rigorousness.  Complete  
disclosures  of  the methodological components, procedures, and processes are impera- tive because reviewers use this 
information to evaluate the execution of  the  scientiﬁc  method  and  uncover  weaknesses  that  dilute  the 
substantive contributions and limit the value of expanding knowledge to existing literature insights.

5.3.1. Type of research and respondent base
Authors need to describe clearly and concisely the type of research approach executed to capture high-quality data for 
testing the study's hypotheses. Reviewers look for answers to the following questions:
•  Does the research involve just one main study, a main study with multiple stages (or phases), multiple studies, a 
single experiment, or multiple experiments?
•  Is the method qualitative, quantitative, or mixed?
•  Is the investigation survey or experimental dominant?
•  Is the data cross-sectional or longitudinal in nature?
•  What  speciﬁc  procedures  does  the  study  implement  for  data collection?
Another   topic   that   requires   clear   detailed   discussions   is   the speciﬁcation of the respondents in the 
investigation. Reviewers will seek insight to these types of questions:
•  From whom and when are the data collected?
•  Why are the selected respondents or subjects appropriate?
•  What type of sampling procedure is employed (i.e., probabilistic or nonprobabilistic)?
•  How many respondents or subjects does the study sample?
•  How many respondents or subjects actually participated?
•  What is the ﬁnal response rate?
•  How does the study assess nonresponse bias?

5.3.2. Constructs and measurements
Other important method subsections reviewers use to evaluate the scientiﬁc rigorousness of the investigation and the 
quality of data are the discussions providing insights to the study's constructs and measure- ments. The focus is on 
not only identifying and deﬁning each construct in the investigation but also clarity in discussing how each construct 
is actually  measured,  including  the  different  reliability  and  validity assessments (i.e., discriminant, 
convergent, and nomological) as well as overall construct validity. Reviewers look for clear, concise discus- sions  
including  a  description  of  the  exact  type  of  scale  design  (i.e., nominal, ordinal, interval, ratio, graphic 
rating, ordinal ranking, Likert, semantic differential, etc.), number of items in the scale, and sets of speciﬁc scale 
point descriptors. When authors' use previously estab- lished scales, measurement discussions must provide information 
that answers these questions: Who is the original author of the scale? What are the reported scale's reliability and 
validity assessments? Are there any weaknesses to the existing scale? Why is a particular existing scale the right one 
to use in the current investigation?

5.3.3.  Problematic  concerns  with  adopting  and  adapting  previously published scales
Authors' justifying the reliability and validity of the article's current
construct measures by stating that the measures are either adopted or adapted from previously published scales in the 
literature is a problem for  journal  reviewers.  The  problem  lies  in  the  confusion  of  what adopting and 
adapting means from a scale development–measurement perspective.  The  following  examples  offer  points  of  clarity. 
 When authors  use  an  existing  published  scale  in  a  new  investigation, “adopting” means the current scale 
measure design is exactly as in its original  form  with  no  modiﬁcations  and  the  current  construct  is viewable  
conceptually  as  originally  intended.  When  researchers selectively  use  only  a  portion  of  an  original  scale  
design  or  make modiﬁcations to ﬁt the current investigation better, the measurement, at best, is an adaptation of the 
original design, resulting in the creation of a  new  alternative  scale  measure.  Original  scales  that  are  not  
fully adopted or are creatively modiﬁed (or adapted) to ﬁt a new situation have to be considered new scale measurements 
and must go through all the  standard  procedures  of  scale  development  and  reﬁnement, including  reliability,  
validity,  and  dimensionality  determination (Churchill, 1979; Gerbing and Anderson, 1988; Hair, Black, Babin, and 
Anderson, 2010). Use of adopted or adapted scale measures requires providing  a  clear,  concise  discussion  of  the  
key  development  and reﬁnement results. Omitting such discussions will prompt reviewers, especially those with 
methodology and measurement expertise, to raise pointed concerns about the new scales. In important scientiﬁc articles, 
a poorly  or  vaguely  written  methodology  section  will  raise  more questions and concerns than provide insights, 
lowering the likelihood that the article will be acceptable to reviewers and more likely eliminate the manuscript from 
receiving serious publication consideration.

D.J. Ortinau / Journal of Business Research 64 (2011) 150–156                                                           
                                                155


5.4. Results–ﬁndings

This  section  focuses  on  presenting  the  empirical  ﬁndings. Reviewers  look  for  straightforward  discussions  
that  simply  report the acceptance and rejection decisions of the hypothesized relation- ships along with support from 
summary tables and ﬁgures displaying the  data  and  test  results.  Authors  must  use  care  to  display  all  the 
pertinent data structures and statistical test results and clearly labeled each summary table. Authors should not waste 
space by repeating verbatim what tables and ﬁgures display but rather present the key results that support either the 
acceptance or rejection of each tested hypothesis. Reviewers are not expecting detailed discussions about insights, 
implications the results are suggesting, or explanations why the results came out as they did.

5.5. Discussion

The discussion section is very important in a scientiﬁc article. The focus is on precisely identifying and clearly 
discussing the scientiﬁc information  that  the  data  and  test  results  provide,  as  well  as  the importance those 
insights have on the topic, research questions, and understanding  (i.e.,  contributions)  to  the  marketing  
literature. Authors  need  to  avoid  presenting  vague  or  superﬁcial  self-serving insights as well as exaggerating 
the actual ﬁndings and implications, if the data results cannot support the intensity. Reviewers look for clear 
evidence  that  the  ﬁndings  provide  new  or  different  scientiﬁc information about the research problems (or 
questions) and support for the initial argument for undertaking the investigation, including precise justiﬁcation of 
how and why the insights contribute to the literature.  When  the  study's  ﬁndings  only  add  empirical  evidence 
validating (but do not expand) existing literature insights, reviewers expect  a  concise  explanation  of  the  
empirical  and  theoretical importance  of adding this type of support to scientiﬁc information existing in the 
literature. Rather than rehashing what the Introduction section reports, authors must present solid discussions on how 
the ﬁndings  meet  or  fail  the  research  objectives  or  purpose  of  the investigation. Finally, authors should 
avoid overselling any contribu- tion, if the results cannot accurately support the claim.

5.6. Conclusions–managerial implications

From  a  reviewer's  perspective,  the  focus  is  on  presenting  the speciﬁc implications of the study's empirical 
ﬁndings and their value to a multitude of individuals in the marketing community. Scientiﬁc research  ﬁndings  can  
result  in  support  of  either  managerial, theoretical,  methodological  implications  or  some  combination. Authors 
need to discuss fully the scientiﬁc importance and relevancy of  each  implication.  The  philosophical  position  and  
mission  of  the journal inﬂuence the extent to which the implications tilt stronger for managers,  academic  
researchers,  public  policymakers,  or  some combination  of  stakeholders,  including  discussions  relating  to 
possible  future  research  directions  that  can  spawn  from  the  key ﬁndings.
Reviewers realize that no empirical research is ﬂawless and expect solid  coverage  of  all  known  limitations  
inﬂuencing  the  research endeavor. The limitations must be honest and forthcoming. Discus- sions  need  to  identify  
the  real  impact  of  the  limitations  on  the generalizability of the study's ﬁndings and scientiﬁc contributions to 
the literature as well as possible calls for future research.

6. References

The reference section of scientiﬁc articles serves several important information  roles  worth  noting.  First,  the  
accuracy  of  the  listings directly  inﬂuences  reviewers'  judgments  of  the  relevancy  of  the theoretical  
support  used  in  justifying  the  opening  argument  for

undertaking the scientiﬁc research endeavor and the theoretical (or literature) insights in the article's literature 
review section. Use care in making  sure  cited  reference  articles  truly  represents  the  intended support. Filling 
page space with irrelevant reference cites creates a negative perception by reviewers, who know the literature and 
those cited articles. Second, accurate reference listings serve as important information sources for other scholars 
holding research interests in the same (or similar) scientiﬁc research topic. Authors must carefully double-check that 
the listed references match the reference cites in the text of the article. Reviewers will check to make sure authors 
cite each reference, at least once, somewhere in the body of the article and all reference cites are properly listed in 
the reference source section, along  with  the  correct  year  designation  of  the  cited  sources. Reviewers  make  
inferences  of  sloppy  work  when  citations  and references  do  not  corroborate,  typically  resulting  in  a  
negative impression of the article's journal quality factor. Finally, inaccuracies in reference listings and cites 
negatively impact the validity and value of the various objective impact metrics (e.g., social science citation index  
— SSCI,  usefulness  index  — UI,  author's  impact  index  — AII, journal  impact  index  —  JII,  journal  citation  
report  —  JCR,  etc.). Inaccurate  impact  metrics  can  negatively  inﬂuence  the  worth  of scholars' scientiﬁc 
contributions to the existing body of knowledge in the  discipline  and  the  quality  impact  (or  scientiﬁc  
importance)  of journals within the marketing community.
Some  additional  words  of  caution  concerning  references  in
scientiﬁc  articles  are  worthy of  comment.  Authors must  be  careful to adhere to the speciﬁc writing style of the 
targeted journal for listing the  references  in  the  article.  Different  journals  have  different formatting  
requirements  and  policies.  Many  reviewers  interpret receiving  a  scientiﬁc  manuscript  not  prepared  according  
to  the journal's writing style guide as an insult to the journal. When using reference sources to support opinions and 
facts, authors need to take the time to go over the full article. Do not cut corners by just bringing in  reference  
cites  some  previous  researchers  use  in  their  articles, because  those  cites  might  not  be  appropriate  to  
the  current manuscript's story. Authors need to remember, many reviewers are experts at identifying the misuse of 
cites as supportive evidence — by deﬁnition,  reviewers  receive  the  manuscript  to  review  because  of their 
expertise in the subject matter.

7. Title and abstract

The  last  two  elements  of  a  scientiﬁc  article  are  the  Title  and Abstract.  For  the  manuscript's  title,  
authors  must  be  creative  but accurate in describing what story the article actually communicates. Authors should 
avoid having the title go beyond 8 to 10 words. Make sure the key constructs or topical focus is part of the title. 
Using a colon in the title is not a requirement.
Marketing journals restrict the length of the abstract to between 100 and 200 words. Authors need to craft the abstract 
well in order to draw  quick  attention  and  feelings  of  importance,  relevancy  and excitement in the reader's 
mind. Authors need to concisely describe the importance of the problem under investigation, highlight one or two key 
ﬁndings/contributions, and offer a catchy implication.

8. SoThe concluding thoughts

The need to publish important scientiﬁc articles in prestige and high-quality  marketing  journals  is  increasing,  
yet  acceptance  rates ranging between 7  and 18%  suggest  that many marketing scholars (especially  new  ones)  
struggle  to  understand  and  integrate  the elements it takes to produce high-quality scientiﬁc articles. Numerous 
published  editorials  and  comments  from  current  and  past  journal editors,  books,  and  special  invited  
articles  provide  insights  on publishing in prestigious and high-quality journals, but most scientiﬁc research  
manuscripts  fail  to  make  it  through  the  journal  review

156                                                                                                D.J. Ortinau / 
Journal of Business Research 64 (2011) 150–156


processes.  Using  a  journal  reviewer  perspective,  this  article  con- tributes in creating awareness and 
understanding of the requirements of  writing  important  scientiﬁc  articles  in  several  signiﬁcant  ways. First,  
researchers  must  understand  writing  important  scientiﬁc articles for prestigious and high-quality marketing 
journals entails a variety  of  complex  and  interrelated  journal  quality  image  issues which mediate journal 
reviewers' judgments of the article's impor- tance and value to the literature and ultimately editors' acceptance/ 
rejection decisions. Second, awareness and understanding of the key coverage issues relevant to the main sections of 
important scientiﬁc manuscripts,  from  the  reviewer  perspective,  provide  insight  and knowledge about the 
expectations and standards authors must meet or  exceed  in  order  to  maximize  the  likelihood  of  an  acceptance 
decision.  Understanding  that  the  journal  review  processes  are  not perfect and include reviewer subjectivity, 
authors are responsible for providing the convincing argument and support that lead reviewers to positive evaluative 
judgments of the importance and relevancy of the research topic and questions driving the research endeavor and the 
existence of scientiﬁc rigorousness in the methodology, measure- ments and analysis procedures. Authors must also 
convince reviewers and editors that the empirical ﬁndings make substantial (absolute) and/or relative (incremental) 
contributions that are meaningful and useful to the literature. Finally, the reference sources at the end of this 
article provide readers with additional opportunities to gain writing and publishing insights as  well as  providing  
corroboration (valida- tion) of many of the ideas and insights in the article.

AcknowledgThents

The  author  appreciates  comments  by  Barry  J.  Babin  (Louisiana Tech University), Barbara Lafferty (University of 
South Florida), and Arch Woodside (Boston College) on earlier drafts of this article.

References
Armstrong  JS.  Research  on  scientiﬁc  journals:  implications  for  editors  and  authors.
Journal of Forecasting 1982a;1:83-104 January–March.
Armstrong JS. Barriers to scientiﬁc contributions: the author's formula. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1982b;5:197–9 
June.
Armstrong JS. Is review by peers as fair as it appears? Interfaces 1982c;12:62–74 October. Armstrong JS. Peer review 
for journals: evidence of quality, fairness, and innovation. Sci
Eng Ethics 1997;3:63–84.
Armstrong JS. Discovery and communication of important marketing ﬁndings: evidence and proposals. J Bus Res 
2003;56(1):69–84.
Armstrong JS. Does an academic research paper contain useful knowledge? No (p b.05).
Aust Mark J 2004;12(2):62–3.
Armstrong JS, Pagell R. Reaping beneﬁts from management research: lessons from the forecasting principles project. 
Interfaces 2003;33(6):89-111.
Armstrong JS, Brodie RJ, Parsons AG. Hypotheses in marketing science: literature and publication audit. Marketing 
Letters 2001;12(2):178–87.
Arnould  EJ.  Helpful  tips:  getting  a manuscript  to  publication  standard.  University  of Nebraska Press; 2003.
Babin BJ, Hair Jr JF, Boles JS. Publishing research in marketing journals using structural equation modeling. J Mark 
Theory Pract 2008;16(4):279–85.
Brown JR, Dant RP. On what makes a signiﬁcant contribution to the retailing literature. J Retail 2008;84(2):131–5.
Campanario JM. The competition for journal space among referees, editors, and other authors and its inﬂuence on 
journal's impact factors. J Am Soc Inf Sci 1996;47(3):184–92.
Churchill Jr GA. A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing constructs. J Mark Res 1979;16(1):64–73.
Dant RP, Brown JR. A journal of retailing retrospective based on ISI web of knowledge. J Retail 2009;85(4):527–31.
Gerbing DW, Anderson JC. An updated paradigm for scale development incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment. 
J Market Res 1988;25(2):186–92.
Hair Jr JF, Bush RP, Ortinau DJ. Marketing research. Digital information environment.
4th edition. Chicago, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin Publisher; 2009.
Hair  Jr  JF,  Black  WC,  Babin  BJ,  Anderson  RE.  Multivariate  data  analysis.  7th  edition.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson-Prentice Hall Publisher; 2010.
Ingene CA. From the beginning … to beyond the ending: reﬂections on the past, present and future of the Journal of 
Retailing. J Retail 2009;85(4):510–8.
Kupfersmind J, Wonderly DM. An authors' guide to publishing better articles in better journals  in  behavioral  
sciences.  Brandon,  VT:  Clinical  Psychology  Publishing Company; 1994.
Ladik DM, Stewart DW. The contribution continuum. J Acad Mark Sci 2008;36(2):157–65. Levy M, Grewal D. Publishing 
perspectives from the editors. J Retail 2007;83(3):247–52.
Mort GS, McColl-Kennedy JR, Kiel G, Soutar GN. Perceptions of marketing journals by senior academics in Australia and 
New Zealand. Aust Mark J 2004;12(2):51–61.
Ortinau DJ. Primer for new authors: on the fundamentals of publishing in marketing journals. J Mark Theory Pract 
2010;18(1):91-100.
Pfeffer  J.  A  modest  proposal:  how  we  might  change  the  process  and  product  of managerial research. Acad 
Manag J 2007;50(6):1334–45.
Rust RT. From the editor: the state of the journal. J Mark 2008;72(6):1–2.
Shugan  SM.  Editorial:  deﬁning  interesting  research  problems.  Marketing  Science 2003;22:1-15 Winter.
Smith DC. The importance and challenges of being interesting. J Acad Mark Sci 2003;31 (2):319–22.
Soper  B,  Milford  GE,  Rosenthal  GT.  Belief  when  evidence  does  not  support  theory.
Psychol Mark 1995;12(3):415–22.
Soutar  GN.  Citation  benchmarks  for  articles  published  by  Australian  marketing academics. Proceedings of the 
ANZMAC conference; 2007. p. 515–20.
Soutar GN, Murphy J. Journal quality: Google scholar analysis. Aust Mark J 2009;17:150–3. Stewart DW. Getting 
published: reﬂections of an old editor. J Mark 2002;66(4):1–6. Stewart DW, Zinkhan GM. Enhancing marketing theory in 
academic research. J Acad
Mark Sci 2006;34(4):477–80.
Summers  JO.  Guidelines  for  conducting  research  and  publishing  in  marketing:  from conceptualization through 
the review process. J Acad Mark Sci 2001;29(4):405–10.
Sutton RI, Staw BM. What theory is not. Adm Sci Q 1995;40(3):371–84. Weitz BA. Editorial. J Mark 1992;29(1):1.
Wittink DR. JMR: 2 P's. J Mark Res 2004;41(1):1–6.
Woodside AG. Journal and author impact metrics: an editorial. J Bus Res 2009;62(1):1–4.
